SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

The Prospectivity of the Rovuma Basin Mozambique
Edwards, H.*, Lainchbury, S., Lonropet, PGS Reservoir
Summary
In 1995 Lonropet SARL (a wholly owned subsidiary of
Lonrho plc), entered into a seven year Production Sharing
Agreement with the Government of Mozambique for the
exploration and development of the Rovuma Basin (both
onshore and offshore) in the Cabo Delgado Province of
Northern Mozambique. The integrated geotechnical studies
currently being concluded have been primarily based on a
recently completed offshore seismic program (3,217 km)
together with gravity, magnetic and satellite data. These
studies show the offshore sector of the Rovuma Basin to be
extremely prospective and have identified potential on
sheer size alone, for a world-class hydrocarbon
accumulation.

Introduction
Mozambique is an independent republic, which lies on the
southeast coast of Africa and forms part of the Southern
African region. The country is bordered by Zimbabwe to
the west, South Africa to the south, Zambia and Malawi to
the Northwest and Tanzania to the north.

quantities of potential reservoir quality sand in the central
Rovuma Basin.
The offshore part of the Mozambique Rovuma Basin is
characterised by a north-south trending narrow continental
shelf with a width of between 5 and 25km. The section of
continental shelf lying within water depths of 200m
represents an area of approximately 12,000km2. Numerous
canyons cutting the shelf margin feed the outer shelf with
sediment derived from the Rovuma delta. Below this
present day morphology, the sedimentary fill of the
Rovuma Basin extends eastwards beyond the present day
shelf margin.
Petroleum data within the Rovuma Basin is limited and any
discussion regarding its prospectivity requires analogues to
be drawn from neighbouring basins in Mozambique,
Tanzania and Madagascar. Primary proprietary field data
was collected and analysed by Lonropet in 1996/97. This
field data examines the western edge of the basin and may
be extrapolated basinward into the permit area.

Although a number of gas fields in Mozambique were
discovered in the early 1960's by Gulf Oil, they remained
unexploited at the time owing to the civil war (which ended
in 1992). The discovery of large reserves of commercially
exploitable natural gas in the Pande and Temane gas fields
in Inhambane province and the possibility of large
hydrocarbon accumulations (mega structures) offshore has
created renewed interest in Mozambique.

The Rovuma Basin
The Rovuma Basin is located along the eastern margin of
northern Mozambique and southern Tanzania, forming one
of a series of passive margin continental basins that stretch
along the coast of East Africa. The basin covers both an
onshore and offshore area of approximately 64,000km2,
divided by the easterly flowing Rovuma River, which
represents the political border between Mozambique and
Tanzania (Figure 1). The Rovuma River gives its name to,
and is the main sediment source for the Rovuma Delta that
dominates the coastal morphology of northern Mozambique
and southern Tanzania. The delta has been a major
depositional environment throughout most of the Tertiary
and is responsible for the accumulation of massive

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Figure 1: Rovuma Basin Location Map

The Prospectivity of the Rovuma Basin, Mozambique

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Interpretation
Our initial interpretation of the 1998 2D seismic data,
together with regional geology studies, show the licence to
extremely prospective and have identified several areas of
potential hydrocarbon prospectivity.
The most outstanding features within the permit are the
"Ibo High" horst trend, offshore Pemba to the South, the
Rovuma (Tertiary) Delta to the North and the Palma
Embayment to the West.

drillable prospects. Some of these leads are seismic "flat
spots" and other amplitude anomalies, particularly within
the Middle Jurassic, Cretaceous and Tertiary sections,
providing additional evidence for the existence of
hydrocarbons within the area. The structural elements, play
fairway trends and currently defined prospects are shown in
Figure 2.

Regional Fairway Analysis
The key hydrocarbon migration fairway trends which,
when calibrated with peak expulsion periods, indicate the
three key areas forming the prime up-dip locations for
hydrocarbon entrapment.
Ibo High
The Ibo High represents the dominant structure for
hydrocarbon accumulation within the Lonropet permit area.
Covering an area of over 1,200 km2, the Ibo High offers
potential on sheer size alone, for a world-class hydrocarbon
accumulation.
Several stacked reservoir horizons both within, and capping
the Ibo High are interpreted, most notably the faulted,
Permian to Early Jurassic Karroo continental sands that
form the Ibo High and the Middle to Upper Jurassic clastic
sands onlapping and draping over the High. Carbonate
build-ups also fringe and cap the High. Mid Cretaceous
pinnacle reefs are seen clearly on the seismic data and form
an important potential reservoir section. These reservoirs
and the overall structural geometry of the Ibo High are
interpreted to have been in place prior to the main period of
hydrocarbon generation and expulsion during the late
Cretaceous and Tertiary.

Figure 2 : Structural Elements & Play Fairways
Throughout the remainder of the concession several
structural and stratigraphic leads have been identified,
which require additional work to develop them in to

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Figure 3 : Ibo High - Schematic Cross Section

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

The Prospectivity of the Rovuma Basin, Mozambique
Two massive hydrocarbon kitchens are interpreted in the
Palma Embayment and Rovuma Basin, to the west, north
and Northeast of the High respectively, with simple up dip
hydrocarbon migration paths invoked in order to charge the
Karroo and Jurassic reservoirs. A second potential
hydrocarbon source is from within the Karroo itself, a
series of restricted marine shales within the Sakamena
Group and a proven major source horizon within the
analogous Morondava Basin in Madagascar.
Within the Karroo sequence intra-reservoir Stratigraphic
seals are likely, given the continental and shallow marine
origin of the clastic sands. It is possible that Karroo
reservoir horizons subcrop and may be sealed by Middle
Jurassic transgressive shales and marls that drape the Ibo
High. Overlying transgressive basinal marls probably seal
both Middle and Upper Jurassic reservoirs.
Palma Embayment
Hydrocarbon prospects within the Palma Embayment,
preserved along the western margin of the Lonropet permit
area, are mostly associated with Early to lowermost Late
Cretaceous horizons. This sequence represents a period of
general deepening with shallow marine to fluvio-deltaic
clastics grading vertically into open marine shelf and slope
environments. Shallow marine to fluvio-deltaic clastics are
restricted to the lowermost Early Cretaceous and are most
likely to have formed as N-S trending facies belts along the
western margin of the basin and probably preserved
onshore Mozambique. Progradation directions would have
been eastwards towards the shale dominated Palma
Embayment, and as such may have fed reservoir quality
clastic turbidite fans such as Aptian-Albian sands
encountered in the Mocimboa-1 well.
Predictions
regarding the likely occurrence of turbidite sand bodies are
difficult because of poorly constrained Rovuma Basin
palaeogeographies for this period. It is possible, however,
that Cretaceous subsidence patterns would have closely
followed that of the Jurassic Palma Embayment with the
Ibo High, although inactive, forming a mechanically rigid
block across which Cretaceous sediments would be draped.
Higher rates of subsidence west of the underlying Ibo High
would have established an N-S trending depocentre with a
similar orientation to that of the Palma Embayment and
along which turbidites are likely to have been channelled.
Reservoir properties of turbidite sand bodies are considered
good and are interpreted to have been inplace prior to the
main period of hydrocarbon generation and expulsion.
Migration paths from Jurassic and Cretaceous shales are
interpreted to have been both up dip and along fracture
conduits.
Seal quality of turbidite sand bodies is
considered high as the sand bodies are stratigraphically
closed and sealed by Cretaceous basinal shales.

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Northern basin area (Tertiary Delta province)
Oligocene to recent fluvio-deltaic sequences of the Rovuma
Delta present a significant body of potential reservoir
quality sand. The main depocentre of the delta during this
period was across the northern part of the study area where
clear easterly dipping progradation geometries are seen on
seismic. Across the delta profile the best reservoir quality
sands are predicted from up-dip fluvio-deltaic and shallow
marine environments. Further east and offshore facies
quality is likely to deteriorate, as deeper marine facies belts
are encountered and net-to-gross ratios become poorer.
High quality sands are therefore most likely within the
rotated listric fault blocks that overlie the backwall of the
large-scale collapse structures observed from seismic.
These rotated fault blocks may provide suitable structural
closures for any hydrocarbon accumulation. The most
likely source for Tertiary delta sands are organic-rich shales
from the Palma Embayment. Migration of hydrocarbons
from the Jurassic into Tertiary sands is favored by the
significantly reduced or even absent Cretaceous shale
sequences following end Cretaceous/Base Tertiary erosion.

Figure 4 : Tertiary Delta - Schematic Cross Section
Stratigraphic sequences preserved within the associated
toe-thrusts are predicted to be mostly slope mudstones and
shales although isolated turbidite sand horizons are likely.
Tertiary source horizons are not considered to be of an
adequate quality to provide a ready source for these sands
due to a relatively shallow depth of burial above the
perceived oil generation window. A Jurassic source is the
most likely origin for any hydrocarbons and can easily be
shown to charge the Tertiary sands as they directly overlie
subcropping Jurassic horizons. The most prominent risk
associated with invoking hydrocarbon accumulations
within the Tertiary delta is its sealing potential due to the
likely low overburden pressures at such shallow depths.

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

The Prospectivity of the Rovuma Basin, Mozambique
This area is extremely challenging to map due to the
discontinuous nature of the seismic reflectors.

sequences across and to the east of the Ibo High allows
potential charging from Middle to Upper Jurassic source
rocks.

Play Types

Tertiary to Oligocene:
Delta slope sand fans enclosed within toe-thrust
hangingwall anticlines. Reservoirs are regarded as having
been sourced from Middle to Upper Jurassic sequences and
sealed by intraformational shales.

Analysis of the data has enabled the identification of a wide
range of hydrocarbon play geometries and a variety of
trapping and sealing mechanisms. These geometries are
interpreted within the regional geological framework to
establish probable reservoir and sealing facies to these
geometries and identify underlying source kitchens and
migration pathways. Play types are as follows:
Permo-Triassic to Lower Jurassic:
Fluvio-deltaic to shallow, marginal marine sands of the
Sakamena and Isalo Groups of the Karroo are enclosed
within rotated fault blocks of the Ibo High. Reservoirs are
interpreted to have been sourced from the Karroo
Sakamena and Isalo Groups and sealed by intra-Karroo
shales and Middle to Upper Jurassic transgressive shales
across the Ibo High.
Middle to Upper Jurassic:
Shallow marine barrier reefs and shoals established ontop
and fringing the intrabasinal Ibo High. Also progradation
silicalastic sands shedding off the Ibo High towards the
east.
Karroo and Middle to Upper Jurassic Palma
Embayment facies provide the potential source, whilst
intraplatform shales and Early Cretaceous shales seal the
reservoir plays.
Early Cretaceous:
Clastics: shallow marine clastics supplied from the western
basin margin prograding and onlapping the intrabasinal Ibo
High. Also reef build-ups within the Early/Mid-Cretaceous
Aptian/Albian constitute a further important play type.
Reservoirs are sourced by Middle to Upper Jurassic shales
and sealed by overlying Early Cretaceous shale sequences.
Early to Late Cretaceous:
Turbidite fans supplied from the western basin margin and
channelled along the main N-S axis of the Palma Basin by
the Ibo High. Turbidite reservoirs are sourced by Middle to
Upper Jurassic shales and sealed and closed by Cretaceous
shales. This play type is only present across the western
margin of the Lonropet permit area as the Cretaceous
section has largely been eroded east of the Ibo High
following end Cretaceous fault block rotation.
Lower Tertiary:
Shallow marine clastics onlapping the base Tertiary erosion
surface and truncated by the basal decollement surface to
listric structures within the Rovuma Delta. Truncation by
the basal decollement surface is regarded as providing the
main reservoir seal. The absence of thick Cretaceous shale

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Oligocene to present:
Fluvio-deltaic sand-rich sequences across the western
Rovuma Delta enclosed within rotated normal fault blocks
during collapse of the delta slope profile. Reservoirs are
regarded as having been sourced from Middle to Upper
Jurassic sequences and sealed by fault closure and
intraformational shales.

Conclusions
The initial seismic interpretation of the new 1998 2D
seismic data, together with regional geology studies show
the offshore sector of the Rovuma Basin to be extremely
prospective. The most outstanding features identified are
the "Tertiary Delta" in the north and the "Ibo High" horst
trend in the south, which offer potential on sheer size alone,
for world-class hydrocarbon accumulations.
The structural and stratigraphic leads identified elsewhere
in the PSA will require additional technical work to
develop them into drillable prospects.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Lonropet and Energy
Africa for permission to publish this paper.

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

New seismic reflection images of the Nankai subduction zone off southwestern Japan from
JAMSTEC cruise: Seamount subduction and seismic thrust fault
Jin-Oh Park*, Tetsuro Tsuru, Shuichi Kodaira, Narumi Takahashi, Yoshiyuki Kaneda, Hajimu Kinoshita, and
Yoshiteru Kono, Japan Marine Science and Technology Center (JAMSTEC)
Summary
A multi-channel seismic (MCS) reflection survey was
conducted to study the structure of the Nankai convergent
margin off Shikoku Island, southwestern Japan, in July
1997. The MCS data were post-stack depth migrated after
conventional MCS data processing. The MCS data on line
MS104 reveal a buried circular seamount subducting
beneath the Nankai accretionary prism. The subducting
seamount is responsible for deformation of the accretionary
wedge, resulting in a compressed uplifted sediment knoll
and many steep escarpments with NE-SW strike. A
conspicuous out-of-sequence thrust fault was identified
from top of oceanic basement to seafloor on line MS107. It
is apparently related to seismic thrust fault because it is
included within a coseismic rupture area of 1946 Nankai
great earthquake.

discuss the structural features related to the seamount
subduction and implication of the seismic thrust fault in the
Nankai convergent margin.

Introduction
Recently, Japan Marine Science and Technology Center
(JAMSTEC) established a very active seismic research
group of 'Frontier Research Program for Subduction
Dynamics' to study occurrence mechanisms of great
interplate earthquakes around plate convergent margin. The
Frontier Research Program for Subduction Dynamics has
been doing extensive marine multi-channel reflection
survey and wide angle reflection/refraction survey using
many ocean bottom seismographs in both Nankai Trough
and Japan Trench since 1997. Primary objective of the
MCS survey is to image precisely subsurface crustal
structure with depth migration technique. There was very
few study of depth migration imaging in academic base, not
commercial base, in both Nankai Trough and Japan Trench.
In particular, the Nankai Trough convergent margin is
characterized by the periodic occurrence of great thrusttype subduction-zone earthquakes approximately every 100
years (Ando, 1975). The depth migrated image can play a
important role to understand the true subsurface crustal
structure related to occurrence of great thrust-type
subduction-zone earthquakes.
In this paper, we present two post-stack depth migrated
MCS reflection data crossing the Nankai Trough, which
reveal a subducted seamount beneath the accretionary
wedge and a possible seismic thrust fault within the
accretionary wedge of the Nankai Trough. The pre-stack
depth migration is now in progress. We interpret and

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Figure 1: Bathymetry and physiographic features of the
Nankai convergent margin. Positions of multi-channel
seismic reflection lines are shown. The bold lines indicate
the positions of lines MS104 and MS107 displayed in
Figure 2. Site 808 of Ocean Drilling Program Leg 131 is
indicated as a star. Water depth contours are in meters.
EP=Eurasia Plate. PSP=Philippine Sea Plate. PP=Pacific
Plate. KSC=Kinan Seamount Chain.
Geologic Setting
The Nankai Trough is relatively shallower trench which is
located at southwestern Japan, and is about 700 km long
(Figure 1). The Nankai accretionary prism defined as the
landward wedge of the Nankai Trough mainly consists of
offscraped and underplated materials from the trough fill
turbidites and the Shikoku Basin hemipelagic sediments. At
this convergent plate margin, the Philippine Sea Plate
(PSP) is subducting beneath the Eurasia Plate (EP) to the
NNW. The convergence rate of the Philippine Sea Plate
under the Eurasia Plate is approximately 4 cm/yr (Seno et
al., 1993). The Nankai Trough off Shikoku Island is
characterized by a broad, flat seafloor in water depths
between 4500 and 4900 m (Figure 1), and the trough floor
is filled by a turbidite sequence overlying the Shikoku
Basin hemipelagic mudstones. The Nankai forearc grades

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Seismic images of the Nankai Trough
landward to the older accretionary prism called Shimanto
Belt. Extending from central Honshu to the Ryukyu
Islands, the Cretaceous to Tertiary Shimanto Belt is about
1800 km along strike with a maximum width of 100 km
and constitutes the largest structural element of the
Japanese Islands (Taira et al., 1992). On recent Ocean
Drilling Program (ODP) Leg 131, site 808 (Figure 1) was
occupied by the Joides Resolution
and constrained
lithology and geological age of the units, from the slope
apron sedimentary cover down to oceanic basement at the
toe of the Nankai accretionary prism.
Data Acquisition and Processing
A MCS reflection survey was carried out across the
western Nankai Trough using R/V Kairei of the Japan
Marine Science and Technology Center (JAMSTEC) in
July 1997. A 3000 in3 array of air-guns with wave shape
kit was used as the controlled sound source and recording
was done with a 120-channel streamer with 25 m group
spacing. The maximum offset was 3200 m. Seismic
reflection records of 13.5 sec were obtained for deep
structure imaging with 4 msec sampling interval. Positions
of the MCS lines are shown in Figure 1.
Post-stack depth migration was applied after conventional
preprocessing such as trace editing, CDP sorting, filtering,
deconvolution, multiple suppression, and stacking. We
used the FOCUS software and Origin 2000 workstation for
seismic data processing. Each velocity-depth model for the
depth migration was iteratively built by velocity-depth
focusing analysis. Post-stack depth migrated images on
both lines MS104 and MS107 and their interpretations are
represented on Figure 2.
Results and Discussion
Profile MS104
We can clearly identify a subducted seamount attached to
the descending PSP buried within the accretionary prism of
the overriding EP around CDP 4400. This seamount is
about 1 km in height, and its base is about 13 km in
diameter. A prominent uplifted knoll exists centered at
about CDP 4000, beneath which we observe a thickened,
slightly deformed accretionary prism and the subducted
seamount. The knoll is about 150 m high relative to the
surrounding landward flat seafloor. The knoll and
escarpment structures may be caused by landward
compression of the accretionary prism due to the
subducting seamount. We observe a strong Bottom
Simulating Reflector (BSR) with polarity reversal within
the accretionary prism.
This subducting seamount is considered to have been one
of the seamounts of the Kinan seamount chain in the
Shikoku Basin (Figure 1). It is located at the extension of
this seamount chain, which is interpreted as a fossil

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

spreading axis of the Shikoku Basin. This seamount has not
been previously reported; we name it the "Muroto
seamount". Yamazaki and Okamura (1989) proposed the
existence of a subducting seamount under the Tosabae off
Shikoku, which is located east of profile MS104, based on
bathymetric and magnetic data. However, they could not
actually image the seamount. Our data uniquely image a
subducting seamount with seismic reflection methods at the
SW Japan convergent margin. This seamount is significant
in that subducting basaltic seamounts are large enough to
act as the kind of seismic asperity whose rupture commonly
causes thrust-type earthquakes at convergent plate margins
(Cloos, 1992).
Profile MS107
Subduction of the PSP beneath the EP is clearly observed
on this profile. We also observe a strong Bottom
Simulating Reflector (BSR) with polarity reversal within
the accretionary prism. A conspicuous out-of-sequence
thrust fault with high amplitude is identified from top (CDP
1800) of oceanic basement to seafloor (CDP 1000). This
thrust fault is 10 km long horizontally and 3 km long
vertically. It is apparently related to seismic thrust fault
because it is included within a coseismic rupture area
(Hyndman et al., 1995) of 1946 Nankai Trough great
earthquake. Our data uniquely image a possible seismic
thrust fault which was generated by recent great earthquake
at subduction zone.
Conclusions
We have done post-stack depth migration processing using
the MCS data obtained in the Nankai convergent margin
off Shikoku Island, southwestern Japan. The MCS data on
line MS104 reveal a buried circular seamount subducting
beneath the Nankai accretionary prism. Such a seamount
can play an important role as seismic asperity related to
thrust-type subduction-zone earthquakes at convergent
plate margins. A conspicuous out-of-sequence thrust fault
was identified from top of oceanic basement to seafloor on
line MS107. We interpret that it is one of the seismic thrust
faults related to recent great earthquakes at the Nankai
convergent margin, because it is included within a
coseismic rupture area of 1946 Nankai great earthquake.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the shipboard scientific party
and crew of the R/V Kairei for their support in acquiring
the MCS data.
References
Ando, M., Source mechanisms and tectonic significance of
historical earthquakes along the Nankai Trough,
Tectonophysics, 27, 119-140, 1975.

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Seismic images of the Nankai Trough
Cloos, M., Thrust-type subduction-zone earthquakes and
seamount asperities: A physical model for seismic rupture,
Geology, 20, 601-604, 1992.
Hyndman, R.D., K. Wang, and M. Yamano, Thermal
constraints on the seismogenic portion of the southwestern
Japan subduction thrust, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 1537315392, 1995.
Seno, T., S. Stein, and A.E. Gripp, A model for the motion
of the Philippine Sea plate consistent with NUVEL-1 and
geological data, J. Geophys. Res., 98, 17941-17948, 1993.

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Taira, A., et al., Sediment deformation and hydrogeology
of the Nankai Trough accretionary prism: Synthesis of
shipboard results of ODP Leg 131, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.,
109, 431-150, 1992.
Yamazaki, T., and Y. Okamura, Subducting seamounts and
deformation of overriding forearc wedges around Japan. In
Cadet, J.P. and Uyeda, S. (Eds.), Subduction Zones: the
Kaiko Project, Tectonophysics, 160, 207-229, 1989.

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Seismic images of the Nankai Trough

Figure 2: Post-stack depth migrated seismic profile of lines MS104 and MS107.

SEG 1999 Expanded Abstracts

Downloaded 12/07/18 to 109.171.137.211. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

First Constant Angle 3D Circular Borehole Profile on Ekofisk
John A. Dangerfield*, consultant, Vincent Clochard and Volker Dirks, Compagnie Generale de Geophysique
and Peter B. Dillon, consultant.
Summary
